[Music]
don't look now but snakes whoo they look
like an alien species and some of the
things they're capable of will convince
you they're not from this planet they
see in predator like infrared they shed
their skin and have you ever seen that
weird-looking tongue yeah let's start
with that what why do snakes have forked
tongues because spoon shaped tongues
were already taken no it's because they
don't use their tongue like we do think
about it you really don't have time to
taste something if you can only swallow
food all without chewing it instead of
using it to taste snakes
smell with their tongues that's why they
always flicker it in and out they want
to catch nano particles in the air
that will tell them if their prey or
some kind of danger is nearby that's
also why their tongues are split in two
near the end this introduces one of my
favorite all-time words bifurcated
meaning divided into two branches hey
try that one out in conversation
sometime today the fork allows snakes
descends a larger radius and know the
direction the scent came from for
example if the smell is stronger for one
part of the tongue and weaker for the
other then this smelly thing is closer
to that first part it's easy to imagine
because your hearing works the same way
no your ear isn't bifurcated if it is
you might want to get that checked out
but you have one on each side of your
head this allows us to hear in stereo we
have all the information about how close
and in which direction the source of the
sound is so yeah you kind of have that
in common with snakes
why don't snakes have legs it may seem
like these reptiles never needed to
evolve a pair of legs or arms but it all
happened the other way around snakes one
day decided that legs were highly
overrated and slithering is way too cool
to miss out on so they got rid of any
limbs entirely ok it didn't exactly go
down like that
it happened over several million years
of evolution but you get it how do
biologists know this many snake species
still have rudimentary bones that leave
no doubts some time ago
they were legs there are flying snakes
well that's nightmarish somewhere in
that same evolutionary process some
species v that we know of aim to become
even more terrifying they learn how to
fly this isn't the same flight birds are
capable of and it doesn't give snakes an
ability to catch themselves one for
dinner but it's an effective way to go
over great distances and avoid some
predator that's caught a snake off-guard
while it was chilling in a tree in basic
terms it's more like gliding than flying
or falling in style
the snake throws itself off a tree
branch flattens its body and moves in an
S shape to change direction in the air
snakes don't have eyelids so don't ever
expect one don't wink at you just like
legs snakes have decided they don't need
eyelids either why because they're
lookers are covered in scales - well
it's one big transparent scale and that
has its downside stakes go almost
completely blind when they shed their
skin since these scales aren't
transparent anymore during this time
these eye skills are called Brill and
like any other scale on the snake's body
it's made of keratin the same material
our nails and hair are made of on that
note why do they shed their skin a
counter question would be why do you
every animal in the world sheds its skin
including people the only difference is
that snakes do it all at once and in one
big piece we do it constantly but in
tiny flakes you can't even see your
notice as for why snakes shed it like a
glove it's because they're scaled
covered skin doesn't grow with their
bodies and snakes grow all their life
non-stop so they simply change outfits
that don't fit them anymore their vision
is horrible snake eyes aren't the
sharpest out there
never mind that that eyeball scale is
all blurry and due for a shedding snakes
can't see colors at all most of them
only see shapes and the clearest shape
for them is the one that's moving this
poor eyesight isn't a problem for them
since they only hunt every once in a
while their digestive cycle is quite
long
so after a good meal all they need to do
is hide somewhere safe for a week or
even longer maybe watch some football on
the couch to sense the world around them
they have much better tools infrared
sensing they don't smell with their nose
and they don't see with their eyes yeah
snakes seem to have the five senses all
jumbled up to make up for their horrible
eyesight snakes have a special pit organ
near their nostrils that can sense heat
radiation this way they can feel their
prey going by when this image is
combined with a sense of smell coming
from the tongue that's bifurcated and
the ability to track any movement the
snake has no problems getting itself
some dinner and evading predators
why do Cobras have hoods Cobras are
known for their unique hoods and their
unsettling ability to spit venom as it
turns out these two features are closely
connected first about that hood you
might know that it serves as a warning
sign for predators to back off it also
makes the snake look bigger and more
intimidating but did you know that the
iconic cobra hood is made of ribs that
stick out and sort of umbrella the loose
skin on the sides of the snake's neck
the warning worked for a while but then
the Cobras predators called the snakes
Bluff and continued to prey on them so
many of them like the king cobra started
spitting their venom right into the
offender's eyes how rude
how do rattlesnakes make that noise with
their tail like the Cobras hood this
snakes rattle is a warning but here's
how it works
each time a rattle snake sheds its skin
it gains an in long gated scale on its
tail so the older the snake the more of
these rings also known as buttons cute
right it has when shaken these rings
knock against each other and produce a
sound since this part of the tail is
hollow it makes the sound more audible
and that rattle means it's time to
skedaddle hey that rhymes why do they
kiss because they're leaking air no
again snakes give you plenty of warning
that they'd like you to please go away
because you're giving them
xiety if you don't take the hint they'll
be happy to sing some things india
anyway the real reason for the hiss
snakes don't have vocal cords they only
have a glottis which is a flap that
closes and opens the windpipe so that
food doesn't go down the wrong tube when
it's swallowed you have a glottis too by
the way a lot of us have a glottis but
without a voice box snakes can only push
a bunch of air through the glottis to
make it vibrate and produce that hissing
sound so when you mimic a snakes hiss by
making any sound with your tongue you're
not quite getting the accent right it
needs a little or something they move
faster than the blink of an eye it takes
you 200 milliseconds to blink sounds
like a lot for such a simple movement
but you know how quick that is but get
this a snake Springs from a folded
position launches itself up to 2 feet
forward opens its jaws and bites in just
50 to 90 milliseconds the average
reaction time for a startled animal is
almost the same but it's often not
enough to avoid the strike their jaws
are like a trap the snakes lower jaw
isn't attached to the upper part of his
skull which makes them highly flexible
they can open their mouth up to 150
degrees and swallow prey that's 5 times
wider than their own body man I had a
roommate like that once cleaned out my
fridge the prey won't escape those jaws
even if it isn't poisoned or constricted
because the snake's mouth is filled with
up to 200 teeth all of them are not
suited for chewing clearly but they make
an ideal trap with little chance for
escape
well that just creeps me out how about
you hey if you learn something new today
and the word of the day is bifurcated
then give the video a like and share it
with a friend and here are some other
cool videos I think you'll enjoy just
click to the left or right and remember
stay on the bright side of life